This ingeniously constructed double biography tells the story of a mother and a daughter, two writers, who did not know each other. Mary Wollstonecraft (1759–1797), the author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman, died of septicaemia ten days after giving birth to Mary Godwin, later best known as Mary Shelley (1797–1851), the author of the novel Frankenstein. Very different in character and interests – Wollstonecraft was more political, Shelley more scholarly – both women demanded a rare romantic and intellectual freedom that cost them dearly but pushed the boundaries of possibility for later generations.

Wollstonecraft grew up in a chaotic household, with a father who squandered money and beat her mother. She had little formal schooling but educated herself and was consumed by a hunger for knowledge and equality. Shelley, by contrast, had every educational advantage, but also suffered early loss, since her mother died when she was only ten days old.

Wollstonecraft, an early feminist, went to France at the height of the Revolution, excited by its ideals of liberty and equality. But living through the Terror, watching the streets run with blood, she saw the ideals betrayed; her radicalism tempered but never extinguished. She fell passionately in love with the American adventurer Gilbert Imlay, had a daughter by him, and when he abandoned her she attempted suicide twice.

The great passion of Wollstonecraft's life, however, was William Godwin, the radical philosopher. She combined the role of political visionary and campaigner with that of passionate woman, and Godwin loved her precisely for these qualities. When she died in 1797, giving birth to their daughter, Godwin was destroyed.

As for Mary Shelley, she eloped with Percy Bysshe Shelley at the age of 16 and the two of them lived a literary life of high romance and tragedy. At 18, she wrote Frankenstein. She outlived Percy, who drowned in 1822, and spent the rest of her life keeping his literary legacy alive.