The World Health Organisation (WHO) designated 2020 as the 'Year of the Nurse', marking 200 years since the birth of Florence Nightingale, who established the principles of modern nursing and hospital sanitation. Nightingale founded the first nursing school, at a hospital in London in 1860, and wrote some 200 books and papers. She was the first woman admitted to the Royal Statistical Society, for her pioneering work in statistical infographics. While tending to British soldiers in the Crimean War, she made the case for hospital sanitation using a variation of the pie chart to show that more soldiers died from infections than from injuries.

Many people today think of nursing as a set of skills learned on the ward. In fact, nurses have university degrees and there are doctoral-level studies in nursing. Like doctors, nurses specialise in myriad clinical disciplines, such as neonatology, cardiology and Accident & Emergency.

In the years to come, nurses will be doing a growing number of tasks conventionally reserved for doctors. Already, nearly two-thirds of anaesthetics given to patients in America are administered by certified nurse anaesthetists. In Britain, specialised nurses now perform some types of abdominal, orthopaedic and cardiac surgery.

What would disappoint Nightingale is that the transformation of nursing has been uneven. In countries as varied as India, Germany and Portugal, nurses are still largely treated as doctors' minions. And although nurses make up nearly half of the world's health-care workforce, they are often not at the table when health-policy decisions are made.

The other trend that would concern Nightingale is that nursing has lost its lustre. In many countries, no profession has a higher number of vacancies. By 2030, the world will be short of 7.6m nurses, which is a third of their number today.

At the same time, as diagnostic systems and surgical robots advance, nursing may be the only aspect of the health-care profession in which machines will not replace human beings. Even though nursing is shaped by medical science and technology, its healing powers remain rooted in empathy and a human touch.